## Project Abstract
Philly311 Insights is a powerful command-line utility that transforms raw municipal data into urban intelligence. The product lets the user quickly explore the massive dataset of Philadelphia’s 311 Service requests over the span of 11 years. A user provides a specific category (e.g., “Graffiti Removal” or “Street Defect”) and timeframe. Then, the program scans the public records and provides a statistical report of the trends, changes, spikes, and seasonality of the given category. In addition to that, the user also gets additional insight from AI-assisted explanations to understand what the results mean and what could have influenced them. The user can then easily export the results for further research or personal use.

## Conceptual Design
The program must follow a modular design architecture built entirely in Java from scratch, using its standard libraries. It should be composed of several sets of Java classes, including, but not limited to, data reading and cleaning, trend analysis strategies, Google AI integration, and the main interactive class. It must be cross-platform and not require the use of complicated data science strategies.

## Proof of Concept
Repository URL: https://github.com/NDubelovskyi/311Philly-Insights-PoC. Developed with MacOS 26.0, Java 21 (OpenJDK), Maven 4.0.0. To compile, follow the standard procedure of cloning the GitHub repository into IntelliJ after forking. Then, generate a free API key at Google AI Studio and Replace Keys.GOOGLE_AI_STUDIO_API below with "YOUR_API". Finally, run the program to see whether the OpenDataPhilly and Google Studio API work.

## Background
The City of Philadelphia (https://www.phila.gov/departments/philly311/philly311-monthly-reports/) provides .pdf files of the top service and information requests each month, which is not enough to analyze the changes quickly year over year, especially for the least requested categories. The city also provides a visualization of data (https://data.phila.gov/visualizations/311-requests/), which is also not informative enough to see the changes that occur over time, since it simply summarizes all requests. Besides that, with the rise of AI-agents integration, the project will feature AI’s independent output to provide additional explanation as to why the changes might have occurred. This utility was inspired by Data Science techniques and libraries like Python’s Pandas; however, this project is expected to be used specifically as a lightweight software rather than high-level abstractions. Its purpose is to help citizens, researchers, and reporters quickly see what is going on in Philadelphia and whether any issues need to be addressed or have already been addressed.

## Required Resources
The program is a cross-platform (macOS 26.0+ and Windows 11) utility that requires a stable Internet connection, at least 8GB RAM, 2GB of free space, and Intel Core i5 or M-based MacBook processors for smooth computations.

The open-source data from OpenDataPhilly (https://opendataphilly.org/datasets/311-service-and-information-requests/) must be obtained to perform analysis through the SQL API, which returns a JSON file. Google AI Studio (https://aistudio.google.com) allows making requests for free, enough for this project’s scale. The requests will solely inform of potential reasons for changes, not analyze the whole dataset. IntelliJ IDEA is the expected development environment.
